[Music]
if money makes the world go round then
it also makes my head spin I used to be
financially clueless burning through
paychecks before the bills were even
paid but now that I've been living in
Sweden for a few years here's what I've
learned from the locals make finances
your priority at almost 60% personal
income taxes in Sweden are among the
highest in Europe and about half of
what's left of your salary goes to rent
whether by choice or because of this
circumstance budgeting and spending
smart are a top priority here saving is
a national virtue
the Swedes feel quite okay in refusing
from anything they don't absolutely need
they even have a word for this concept
called langham which translates as
enough or just the right amount in
English living modestly to keep
expenditures at a minimum means they can
rest assured that their bank account
will only grow plant all purchases even
the smallest sitting down and drawing up
a detailed plan of where your money is
going is key here apart from major
purchases like household appliances or
travel expenses they'll even figure out
a budget when throwing a party and
visiting relatives as for impulse
purchases forget about it respect other
people's money asking somebody about
their income and spending habits is
considered rude here finances are a
personal subject that's not often shared
both conversationally and literally if
you're looking to borrow a few bucks or
kronor from a friend because you blew
your whole paycheck on the latest
smartphone nope
Sweden isn't the country for you learn
about Finance at an early age here's
something I could relate to as an
American they have home a can sweetie
schools too only instead of just
learning how to sew on a button or bake
cookies at least that's all I remember
doing in that class they also teach kids
how to make a household budget what
goes towards groceries bill savings and
all the other stuff they'll need to know
as adults find natural ways to cut
spending during the winter the Sun sets
in Stockholm at around 3 p.m. which
means keeping your place lit up can
equal a huge electric bill that's why in
Swedish apartments there's no real need
for curtains or blinds they also try not
to use too many electronic devices and
you'll see plenty of candles and low
energy lightbulbs exercise for free
speaking of the short daylight hours in
Scandinavia the biggest change in my
life is that I get out more
you'll see a lot of Swedish people
hiking running cycling and doing yoga
outdoors why pay for a gym membership
when you can get active and get a little
sunshine for free get rid of stuff you
don't use anymore these things can be
gifted or sold to someone or sent to
recycling
nobody here will store useless junk on
the balcony and they certainly won't buy
things they see no need for this rule
even applies to the older generation
which will surprise anyone with
grandparents that have a hard time
parting with their collections buying
used is just as good if you decide to
sell your stuff you'll find plenty of
buyers if it's not useless junk of
course the Swedes don't care too much
about having the latest and greatest
also known as the most expensive models
of smartphones cars and other gadgets
even when they already have those things
they'll keep using it as long as it's
working fine don't overspend for the
holidays that is don't go out and get a
live tree each year forget about the
fake plastic ones as well they're too
big you have to buy all these
decorations for them and it's just
wasteful trees in that classic
minimalistic Swedish style look just as
cozy and beautiful you can even DIY one
for a fun project
get things on sale even if it's out of
season
why pay two to three times more for
something when it'll be cheaper in a
couple of months
the Swedes buy swimming suits in fall
and winter coats in spring when they get
incredible markdowns reduce reuse
recycle if you buy soft drinks in a
grocery store you'll be charged an extra
Crona if you bring back an empty bottle
or ten you'll get that money back and
they do bring back empty packages since
every Crone accounts even gravel they
spread around the streets and winter is
gathered in the spring wash and reuse
the next winter stay far away from death
getting a loan isn't easy in Sweden but
it's that way for a reason
banks make it hard because they don't
want people going into debt that they
won't be able to pay back make sense
invest instead of borrowing money you
don't have the Swedish philosophy is to
grow what you do have there are special
courses where they teach people how to
manage an investment portfolio it's also
quite common in Sweden to give stocks as
a present to kids so that those
investments grow over time with the
child get your own property later in
life if you're young you'll have a hard
time getting financed for a car or house
banks will trust you only if you have a
stable career and have saved enough
money for the first payment but if you
do buy an apartment or car in Sweden
you'll know for sure that you'll be able
to afford it always think ahead the
Swede starts setting aside retirement
money at a relatively young age around
35 or so nobody's waiting for their
adult children to support them during
their golden years in fact they're not
just looking to save enough pension
money for modest legume style retirement
they want to indulge when you retire now
that they've lived a long life of saving
every Crona and refusing from the
luxuries of life many Swedish pensioners
can afford
pretty much anything older folks have no
problem traveling the world buying
themselves nice gifts and just having
the fun they've denied themselves for so
long and now that I'm so interested in
keeping my finances in order
thanks Sweden I've got a few more of my
own personal tips that will help you
save a time let me know down in the
comments if you're already doing any of
these things buy in bulk so for example
a 12-pack of soap will be cheaper than
the same number of separate bars bought
individually plus you won't have to keep
going to the store and spending more
because you won't run out of stuff as
often save eating out for special
occasions it's fine if you're getting
together with friends or surprising your
mom on her birthday with a dinner at a
nice restaurant but avoid the temptation
to grab a burger on your way home from
work
I know it's hard because we're all too
tired and busy to cook but that's why I
cook for the whole week it'll save you
time and energy that you can spend on
other things because time is money right
I like to make a big heaping pot of soup
or chili that'll get me through several
days make a bunch of pancakes and freeze
them for this week's breakfast long
story short
bye and cook in ball
respect your belongings that way you
won't have to repair or replace it as
much I used to go through Footwear so
fast because I just carelessly step on
the heel and slip it off that way now
that I'm more diligent about untying
them and taking them off carefully my
shoes are serving me much longer turn
off the heating or a/c before you go to
bed get a warm blanket for cold nights
and open a window when it's a little too
hot hey it's cheaper than a sky-high
electric bill you'll be asleep you won't
even notice wash dishes in a sink full
of water I used to be bad about doing
the dishes under a running faucet it's
wasteful for your wallet and for the
environment
don't buy bottled water
you have an endless supply of h2o right
in your faucet get a reusable water
bottle and fill it before you head out
if the tap isn't exactly safe to drink
where you live then boil it or get a
good quality filter even if it's pricing
it be a smart investment book tickets
online in advance when I visit my family
in the States it's always months after I
bought the ticket don't wait until the
last minute prices go up that closer
that date comes stop buying foods that
you constantly throw away I can't tell
you how many times I've tossed soiled
bell peppers I don't know why I kept
buying them I guess I'm not a pepper
person
hey he's a pepper she's a pepper they're
a pepper it's a pepper wouldn't you like
to be a pepper too never mind hey if you
learn something new today then give the
video a like and share it with a friend
and here are some other cool videos I
think you'll enjoy just click to the
left or right and remember stay on the
bright side of life